hey guys welcome to a special edition of
health theory when we started the show
we named it health theory because we
wanted to explore every strategy that
may improve your health and if you've
watched the show before you know that to
improve your mindset you must first
start with the body now i've had the
opportunity to sit across from some of
the greatest minds in the health space
many of whom have talked at length about
the carnivore diet so today i wanted to
share with you everything you need to
know about the carnivore diet enjoy
what is the carnivore diet
and this you need to explain because
you're the first person i've ever heard
say because i'd never dove into the
carnivore diet before but you're the
first person i've ever heard say no no
from an evolutionary standpoint this is
probably how we ate and so i'd like to
know sort of the the main things that
that people throw out that our digestive
tract is clearly set up to do both that
our teeth are the teeth of an omnivore
like right how do you um show that that
isn't true there's a lot of nuance there
and i think the evolutionary discussions
are always a little bit
conjecture and the whole discussion here
is premised on the fact that what we did
in the past is what we should be doing
now and that is debatable as well i mean
some people in evolutionary biology
would debate how quickly humans can
adapt to things what we do know is that
humans have really only been
doing agrarian that is farming type
societies for about 10 to 12 000 years
this is called the neolithic revolution
but if we back up way further we can go
back 80 thousand years and look at
stable nitrogen isotope studies of
collagen
so basically they look at different
types of nitrogen in the bones of
neanderthal and homo sapiens and what
they see is so much nitrogen so the
ratio of the nitrogen gives us a sense
of what these people were eating because
we know that when we eat higher up the
food chain we accumulate more nitrogen
and what we see is that there is so much
nitrogen in those bones that those
people were essentially carnivores
meaning they were eating almost entirely
animal based diets and then if you look
back further two million years ago
again we're getting into the realm of
extreme paleoanthropology but there's
pretty good evidence if we look at the
size of the cranial vault of a human
our brain size had this logarithmic
uptick two million years ago that was
when we were homo erectus homo habilis
and we also see the
the onset of stone tools and evidence
for hunting then so there's a really
compelling story you can put together
there that hunting animals access to
animal foods made us human it made our
brains go wow and we got from 700 cc's
in the cranial vault to about 1 500 ccs
in the cranial vault in about a million
years the previous 30 million years of
primate evolution we'd stayed about
level at about 300 to 400 cc's in terms
of the size of our brain there's pretty
good evidence that the bigger your brain
the more developed the neocortex you
have more complex processing so i like
the
the i get it's a narrative you're
putting it together maybe this maybe
that and it comes together and this is a
nice narrative that has internal logic
but one thing that seems certainly
plausible in that same internal logic is
if we pass through a primate evolution
and that we had you know
similar ancestry for a very long period
of time and as far as i know most
primates are designed to munch on a
bunch of leaves and [__]
and deal with that if we started there
then why would we think that we swung
all the way to entirely carnivorous
and i think that this the interesting
thing here is in that brain size
that
we had eaten vegetables and there
actually are examples of primates eating
other primates the primates do eat
animals but we had had primarily a
vegetable-based diet or a plant-based
diet for 35 million years of private
evolution and then something happened
right and we became human and i think
that it was this
sudden access to nutrient density and
macronutrients that we hadn't seen
before
in higher quantities so we had much
higher quantity
fats so dha epa these omega-3 fats
there's lots of theories about what
causes expansion of the human brain and
i would argue much greater access to
micronutrients in the animal foods
because we were eating these much more
bioavailable foods that it was the
eating of the foods that made us human
and so then it became this
risk benefit or just like a an
availability equation if i can go hunt a
woolly mammoth and i can get
a million cal i mean how many calories
in a wooly man like
millions and millions of calories it can
feed the tribe for a week or i can go
look for tubers
what am i gonna do right there's no
question what you're going to do in
terms of calories and fat
i think that the point you make is well
taken and it gives us this really
interesting survival advantage because
we're not always going to be able to
hunt perfectly if you and i go out and
hunt
i guess today is different in terms of
the scarcity of animals but say we're on
the plains 30 000 years ago and we're
hunting if we don't come across a
buffalo we may not have any food today
or tomorrow and in that situation i
think the idea is that humans probably
still ate some plants
but the plants were probably just the
survival food that when you really look
at
where humans get nutrients and this is
bioavailable micronutrients and where
humans would have gotten calories from
evolutionarily animals dwarf plants in
every way there aren't many people today
who are calorie deficient but there are
many humans that are micronutrient
deficient and so if we're talking about
micronutrient adequacy micronutrient
bioavailability this to me is the great
leveler it's so interesting
animal foods are far and away the
winners if you look at the
bioavailability and the presence of
vitamin a vitamin c vitamin e or the
micronutrients calcium zinc selenium
manganese or the dha and epa they're
just animal foods are the richest source
they're the best multivitamin we've ever
encountered so we're going to go hunt
that but evolutionarily i think that if
we couldn't get that we would eat some
plants
and they're going to tide us over in
terms of calories and they're going to
give us
sub-optimal micronutrients we know that
the micronutrients and plants are less
bioavailable
and so we can use them as survival food
kind of harkening back to our ancestry
but i think that what happened is we
became people who realized that animals
were the best source of nutrients and
that is kind of the roots of the
carnivore diet what made you want to go
that far
and then what does a carnivore diet look
like is it just i eat beef or is it
organ meats and all that stuff
so
i had i had kind of come from standard
american diet to primal uh paleo to low
carb high healthy fat to keto and on
keto i was eating a ton of fatty meat
and a little bit of vegetables and and i
enjoy green vegetables but then i kept
you know i'm always researching i'm
always looking and studying and i saw
this
excellent lecture by dr michael eads he
was talking about neanderthals
and what they ate and neanderthals were
[Music]
exclusively carnivore unless they
couldn't get meat and then they would
eat whatever of course but if they could
get fatty meat that's all they ate they
didn't eat anything else and about that
same time nisha and i my wife we checked
our 23andme data and when he got it back
i had more neanderthal dna than 97
percent of the population
and so it was just kind of fortuitous
that both those things happened at the
same time and i was like you know i'm
going to try it for a month what could
it hurt and so at the end of that month
i felt so much better i'd lost another
four pounds people were saying what are
you you look better you've lost weight
like they could see the the even even
from keto
to carnivore my inflammation was even
better i felt better
i used to have terrible heartburn every
day every day even with paleo primal
when i went keto was about 80 percent
better
but then when in a carnivore i have zero
heartburn ever break down carnivore for
me are you eating chicken
i don't eat much chicken my carnivore is
lots of fatty red meat mostly beef uh i
eat eggs mostly the yolks i'll eat
butter or ghee
uh some full fat cheese salt pepper and
some spices that's that's the entirety
of my diet and that may sound boring
but i have yet to sit down and go damn
it another rib eye
it just doesn't happen no for me that
sounds amazing right
um so now let's get into the nitty
gritty of a carnivore diet knows the
tail what does that mean how do i do it
where do i get this stuff right so how
does one in today's world eat
um a carnivore diet yeah so it's i think
tim ferriss has this saying it's not
simple but it's not complex right
you imagine that you and i are out
hunting and we kill an antelope or we
kill a moose
a nose-to-tail approach to a carnivore
diet thinks i'm not just gonna eat the
tenderloin and throw the rest of the
animal out we're going to eat every
piece of that animal because every piece
of that animal has calories and when you
think about it every piece of that
animal has micronutrients that are
unique and so you're going to eat
cartilage you are going to eat the
cartilage
i do think that eating cartilage is a
valuable thing but
in talking to my clients over the last
year that i've been doing this
i've realized that there's like there's
like junior varsity and varsity versions
of carnival right and when people come
on the team you got to put them on the
jv team first unless they're super
gung-ho so i think that if people get
intimidated by the ideal version of a
carnivore diet they can just think of
like what is the doable version of a
carnivore diet but i want them to
understand the basic paradigm because
the most basic version of a carnivore
diet often goes wrong
because it's just too basic and that is
just eating the muscle meat which is
what we see in the grocery store so if
people want to try a carnivore diet for
30 days you really could almost get away
eating steak and eggs i don't think
that's ideal long term nor do i think
that's the best way for a human to do it
in terms of micronutrients or
macronutrients but the simplest version
is steak and eggs or is that better than
hamburger and eggs probably the thing i
like about steak is that you can cook it
medium rare rare
and hamburgers like cooked all the way
through all the time you don't want to
cook out you cook out nutrients i'm
assuming you do cook out some of the
nutrients and so the nice thing about a
steak is you can get a steak that's rare
people like that and the inside and
that's better i think it's better in
terms of the nutrients in there so
you're trying it's interesting would you
eat something if you didn't have to
worry about microbial content would you
eat raw absolutely i don't really i
personally and i don't recommend people
do this eat the majority of my diet raw
right now get the [__] out no you
should've seen you like raw eggs i do
eat raw and that's scary you're freaking
me out so the here's the thing with eggs
what we worry about with eggs is
contamination of campylobacter and
salmonella on the shell of the egg
correct the inside of the egg is
generally sterile
it better be right wouldn't it have to
be it has to be and if it's not sterile
you will know because you'll open it
it'll look like
something died in there which i did
essentially almost
so
when you eat the white of the yolk the
white of the egg i don't want to eat raw
because it has a compound called avidin
which binds biotin most of the avidin in
the egg white is denatured when you cook
it but there's some evidence that not
all of it is true and so what i'm
interested is the most amount of
nutrients and i really try to be a fat
hunter in my carnivore diet we can get
into the nitty gritty of fat to protein
ratios but
i eat the yolk because the yolk is where
most of the nutrients are and i eat it
raw because i'm lazy and i just want to
eat it fast and it tastes good but
before we get to that going back to your
initial hypothesis if you [__] found
an egg you were not going to not eat the
egg yolk or the egg white you're gonna
eat that whole [__] you know i
wonder what our ancestors would have
done you think they'd throw it out i
don't know if they might not you're
right they might if i were in the
wilderness and i came across an egg i
would probably cook it and eat the whole
thing yes but i don't need extra protein
and so i'm just gonna discard the white
eat the yolk and i eat it raw i'll eat
six to eight raw egg yolks a day i'm not
saying this is the way everybody should
do it do you just chug them do you put
them in a glass i just put them in my
hand and oh jam it down god so how are
you just letting the white sieve through
your feet just goes right through and
then you can eat the yolk raw this is
don't have to eat the yogurt you don't
have a lot of friends over when you're
doing this
this is not table friendly dating is
hard for me man it's interesting wow
okay so we're pounding six to eight egg
yolks then we've got a steak chilling in
the fridge that we're going to eat the
next thing i eat is liver culturally as
westerners we do not
eat liver
i ate a little liver worse growing up
that probably saved me when i first
started eating liver i would gag and i
thought oh that's such a strong flavor
i'm not used to it and then gradually i
got to the point where i was like oh now
i'm adjusted to it it's an acquired
taste
for sure i watch like a documentary or
something about polar bears is it their
liver that has too much vitamin a or
something like that this is an urban
legend urban myth yeah so there's never
been a case report of vitamin a toxicity
from eating food
there have been case reports of vitamin
a toxicity people taking vitamin a
palmitate supplement
but you can eat a pretty decent amount
of liver per day and not have vitamin a
toxicity
so i eat raw liver people can eat it
cooked and i'll do three ounces or four
ounces of raw liver per day so i ate the
egg yolks then i ate raw liver again
this is the super varsity version
and i put a little sea salt on it and
then you're gonna love this i've i've
gotten really interested in eating
organs and so
now i'm eating aldeny kidney
raw raw kidney yup and then i'll eat raw
brain
whoa what kind of brain
brain yeah why lamb just tastes better
uh cow brain is impossible to get
because of concerns about bovines
[Music]
but you think about it evolutionarily
this is all my experiment right i'm the
n of one i want to know what this is
like so i can share with people
the brain and the bone marrow would have
been i think things that we prize the
most brain is a delicacy
in many countries because it's rich in
nutrients i mean think about where the
dha goes here and it's been interesting
for me personally at this point in my
carnivore journey to try and eat more of
the animal and go past like that's gross
okay and so at that point i will eat a
steak you know and but a lot of times
there's this anthropological evidence
and this interesting historical evidence
of a lot of cultures eating the organs
first and then saving the muscle meat
for later or giving the muscle meat to
the dogs or other animals wow if people
are primarily grossed out or probably
grossed out about organs there are ways
to get organs they don't have to eat
them there are these desiccated organ
tablets which i think are a really
interesting
new sort of subset of a supplement
industry where you can take brain heart
liver spleen kidney thymus gallbladder
of an animal
dehydrated at low temperature and then
put it in a pill right do you actually
get the nutrients though if you if you
[__] it up by cooking it right i've got
to imagine by doing all that crazy
processing that nothing i want to study
it and see how much is in there but you
know desiccation is like low temperature
dehydration so they're like didn't know
they're like freezing it and then
pulling the water out that way so if
there's any way to do it that would be
the best way but that's a very valid
point it can't be as good as raw liver
which is clearly the best thing ever
yeah okay so let's get to um
well any i'm guessing that that's got to
cover most of what you're eating that
covers most of what i eat so give me
tier one so the basic carnivore diet is
probably meat and eggs right you can do
that all day long for 30 days you'll be
fine okay okay what what am i missing
micronutrients yeah you're mixing i i
here's what i don't want i don't want
[__] where you have to supplement like
if somebody's giving me a diet they're
like wow but make sure that you take the
zinc the magnesium
it's like i want something where what
you're missing is liver
liver because it has
copper
biotin folate riboflavin okay so it's
got stuff i'm not gonna find in that
there's a little bit of there's a
moderate amount of riboflavin and egg
yolk there's a moderate amount of
riboflavin in muscle meat but the
majority of the riboflavin is in the
liver if you wanted to make the simplest
most nutrient-rich carnivore diet it
would be meat eggs and liver meat eggs
and liver steak egg and liver would be
this the most 30 days 30 days 30 days
and then you could add things to that
you know if people want to eat other
things you can eat seafood right you can
eat chicken you can eat pork i can have
chicken yeah yeah chicken breast sure or
i have to have chicken liver well you
can have chicken breast
the carnivore diet is kind of this the
other another name for it which i
perhaps like a little more as a whole
foods animal-based diet whole foods
animal-based diet yep if it comes from
an animal you can use anything carnivore
has a pr problem oh i just want people
to understand that our ancestors ate
fish our ancestors ate scallops and say
shrimps those can all be on a carnivore
type diet in terms of the most doable
easy way this is it if you end up liking
it or your wife ends up doing it long
term there are other manifestations i
would make or other modifications i
would make when you hear some of that
when you go to varsity so i would
include more organ meats just different
organs different organic heart kidney
heart yup the brain sounds horrifying
it's actually not that bad it looks
nasty it does but isn't that kind of fun
no
not there are some things that i get
down because it's like this is hard and
i want to do it brain doesn't make the
list
is the carnivore diet safe
what blood markers are you watching
um sleep sleep scores heart rate
variability body temperature blood
glucose and ketones
my hemoglobin a1c increased by five
tenths of a point so it went from freeze
which is surprising to me yeah 4.8 to
5.3 but everything else i mean iron
ferritin increased which i was probably
expecting eating more red meat things
like that i worry about cholesterol when
triglycerides and glucose and liver
enzymes are out of whack
so
your liver tends to take the brunt of
metabolic burden first it's a key
metaboxy hub and so if your liver
enzymes start to rise your glucose is
rising or hemoglobin a1c is rising
then in your triglycerides are increased
then i'm i'm more concerned about what's
going on with your ldl cholesterol
you know and your low hgl but without
that context i'm not totally worried
about it and the thing that people don't
really realize is like your body can
convert protein via gluconeogenesis to
glucose
there's certain cells and tissues red
blood cells the neuron various central
nervous system cells within our brain
that need absolutely need glucose they
can't use fats or ketones protein can be
back converted as can liberating stored
body fat the body fat is you know you
have your triglycerides and on you know
your triglyceride on top of that is
glycerol and when you liberate that for
free fatty acids to make ketones that
glycerol gets converted to make glucose
a lot of people think you need to have
carbs to raise glucose for obligate
glucose utilizing cells but that
glycerol backbone gets shunted right
into that cycle
so yeah it's it's interesting tom i
don't know what the solution is for
people should they go carnivores should
they not i think if you have
digestive issues it's worth a shot
and it sounds so polarizing
controversial
but you know in functional medicine
we've been talking about this for a
while we
you know people like jeff bland and sid
baker mark hyman
an elimination diet which was
essentially just basically plain old
white rice and lamb that was it
like that's almost carnivore in the
sense obviously if you overdo the white
rice you're going to negate some of that
but it was really eliminating all the
variables that could affect the immune
system
um
you're going to die of heart attack
right right right and so
i my cholesterol currently is 350. my
ldl cholesterol is 250. and i'm not
worried about those at all because
more and more the research that's been
shelved and put in the basements and put
in the attics about lipid and you know
cholesterol and ldl now that all the
research is becoming available and
people are doing review articles and
looking at all the data it actually
looks like the higher your total
cholesterol is the longer you live
and so the entire model has been upside
down this entire time so i'm not worried
about my total cholesterol or my ldl at
all because
my hdl is very high which is my good
protective cholesterol my triglycerides
are very low my hemoglobin a1c or my
three-month blood sugar average is the
lowest it's been since i've been
checking it
all my inflammatory markers are back to
normal i feel great so tell me where's
the risk in that
okay that's super interesting um
walk me through what parts of the um
the cholesterol numbers people should be
caring about not caring about um because
so in my own life i went through a
period that lasted probably for about
two and a half years where i was
essentially doing rabbit starvation
right so i was eating basically chicken
breast broccoli
nothing on it no oil nothing i felt
amazing i felt terrible exactly
absolutely horrifying right but damn i
was lean
and it was amazing
uh but yeah i was i joint pain just was
like in pure insanity and then i because
i heard that ketogenics possibly had
some cancer prevention stuff i tried it
and it was like it was like taking a
drug it was so anti-inflammatory on my
joints i was like well i'm never going
back to rabid starvation that was crazy
right um but
my cholesterol levels were so low when i
was doing the rabbit starvation
and i thought that was a good thing that
i was super amped i felt bulletproof
thought i was going to live forever then
when i started doing ketogenics my
numbers went significantly up and my
doctor was like
we have to get you on lipitor and i was
like you must be joking i've got two
guns tom i've got a 12-gauge shotgun and
i've got a bb gun
you're going to get shot with one of
them which one do you pick i'll take the
bb gun if i die that's it and that's
that makes good sense and so my
contention is is that an elevated a1c an
elevated c peptide which tells me your
blood sugar and and serum insulin levels
are always high
a very low hdl in a very high
triglyceride level
those four tests those that's the
shotgun
if your ldl is is 250 300 that might
might be a bb gun but the the even the
research on levels that high is
completely inconclusive if your doctor
says oh you have a high total
cholesterol you need to be on lipitor
you need to find a new doctor because
he's at least 10 years behind in his
reading okay now if he talks about ldl
then he's at least current but still
when you look at the research in its
totality it's not a risk factor it might
be a bb gun but it's not the shotgun
that that high blood sugar high insulin
low hdl and high triglycerides are
that's the shotgun that's going to kill
you
who would benefit from the carnivore
diet
so
the carnivore diet is something that i'm
super interested in so my wife has
struggled very profoundly with
microbiome issues
and
she's made tremendous progress she's
been dealing with it now for four years
but she's made tremendous progress and
she's gotten to the point where
the things that she eats she can
maintain equilibrium but she isn't
like
progressing as much as i would she's
sort of hit steady state but she's not
making progress in my estimation um
and so one thing that if the hypothesis
about lectins is accurate and that you
have plants that have these toxins in
them you eat the toxins they break the
epithelial lining of the gut and now you
have um your autoimmune response
if that is accurate then potentially for
her if she was a good carnivore and ate
nose to tail and you know got the whole
mix of everything and isn't just eating
hamburgers or steaks
um i'd be very curious to see if that
worked for her or not um i'd be curious
to get your take on the carnivore diet
yeah so
you would think as the author of
ketotarian i wouldn't advocate for the
carnivore diet it's i do use a carnivore
diet in my for my patients that need it
it's an
ultimate elimination approach you're
taking out a lot of variables
and these people with really
dysfunctional guts and gastrointestinal
lining and microbiome and this
inflammatory cascades going on sometimes
you need that
intervention
to lower inflammation for a short period
of time or for
a period of time it could be months
if you're going going to do the
carnivore diet you're going to want to
make it make sure it's nutrient dense
you're going to want to make sure that
you're going for more of the organ meats
from a nutrient density standpoint like
you pointed out
and i have people be fish centric as
well it's not just about the organ meat
so i want people to getting making sure
they're getting their healthy omegas
from
the fish and grass-fed beef house has
omegas as well but the problem with this
is that
they it's not sustainable for most
people long-term and we're going off of
dairy too and many times we're going off
of egg whites
for a while too because
the albumin can be a problem for some
people with autoimmunity the egg white
some people have dairy sensitivities as
well so it's pretty tight that's why for
most people it's not going to be a
long-term thing so we do it for a period
of time we do some broths and soups and
stews and things like that
sort of a gaps approach i don't know if
you're familiar with gaps
it stands for gut and physiology
syndrome or gut in psychology depending
on what you're using it for but it's the
gut brain access the gut physiology axis
so it the premise is lots of bone broth
soups and stews so we use that with sort
of these nutrient-dense organ meats for
a time and then we lean in why soups and
stews bone broth i get yeah i don't
understand soups and stuff well it's
it's soft and cooked meat because even
the meat can be hard to digest for these
people many of them have hypochlorhydria
decreased hydrochloric acid they're not
breaking down meats even wow they have
really messed up guts so we have to help
with their digestion at the beginning
really to even break down meats but then
you start with you lean into pureed
vegetables after that and you know
soft cooked vegetables low fodmap
vegetables which are the fermentable
sugars that people with these dysbioses
can have a problem too how the hell if i
went carnivore for a year
how the hell would i still have bacteria
like a sibo problem so for
fermentation being the thing that i'm
thinking of
would that bacteria not die off well
there are certain bacteria
and yeast that feed on other things too
they can feed on proteins they can feed
on ketones
so then you're gonna have to bring in
some typically herbal antimicrobials to
help with that oh god this stuff gets so
complicated it is complicated my whole
day job is like looking all the
variables and trying to make this as
digestible no pun intended but as
practical as as possible
so
um what do you think about the carnivore
diet is there any logic there well you
know it's interesting i mean you know
like jordan peterson's doing that and
his daughter did it to cure autoimmune
disease and yes if you are really sick
sometimes it can be profoundly helpful i
mean if you have autoimmune disease if
you have
severe obesity i mean there can be real
benefits
but i again
you know we used to eat 800 species of
plants as hunter-gatherers we ate animal
products when we could find them or hunt
them and it was a part of our diet it
was a staple some cultures like the
plains indians like this dakota
they lived mostly on buffalo and they
were the longest live uh
people in history they were had more
centenarians per capita than any other
population at the turn of the century
yeah
so
when you look at that is there you've
talked about you know one thing that
medicine really has got to start doing
is looking at the laws of biology so
yeah you know physicists are looking at
the laws of the universe what are the
laws of biology i'd love to hear what
are some of the laws of biology how does
that play out in terms of
plants because i can walk you through
it's admittedly like a lay person's
understanding but when i walk through
the notion of the plant paradox and you
start thinking of a plant as having a
basically a chemical
evolutionary advantage or the way that
they stop predators is by creating these
chemicals that either upset their
stomach or they're bad for them or
they're bitter tasting or whatever it's
like oh that makes sense when you have
something it has to have a mechanism
against predation yeah and humans are
one of the predators and so okay it
didn't develop claws or whatever it
developed like these chemical signals
you've talked about food being
signals more than just calories so it's
like okay well there's actually some
logic whether it's true or not is a
totally different question but there's a
followable chain of logic to
why
plants potentially
have issues and so like i'm one of these
guys i'm like always trying to hedge my
beds like i have some vegetables just to
make sure because i don't know which way
to bounce yeah yeah but at the same time
i keep telling my wife one experiment
she hasn't run yet to just completely
solve her problem is to completely
eliminate vegetables because she has
she's restricted them and that has
helped tremendously
but it's like what are the odds that
like when she eats animal products she's
fine like if she were to just eat
chicken or just eat beef or pork or
whatever she does very well
there are some vegetables she can add in
she seems fine and there are others that
then become wildly problematic yeah and
so it's like is there anything that they
all share that
for somebody with the sensitivity
they're you know they're an issue or no
no like there's so many other nutrients
in vegetables if you're not eating them
you're kidding committing a cardinal sin
of the laws of biology well if you're
eating nose to tail like you're eating
the liver which has more vitamin c more
vitamin a than any vegetable on the
planet right
you know you can get by but you can get
by or it's ideal i don't think it's
ideal i mean i think your gut
the microbiome feeds on
carbohydrates feeds on phytochemicals so
i have a little different view about
vegetables
and i call it symbiotic phytoadaptation
which is a fascinating concept but
essentially
yes there are defense mechanisms in
plants that help the plants
but also can help us right so for
example we don't make
vitamin c we get it from plants
we need things to help us detoxify so
when you eat broccoli you upregulate the
glutathione the pathways of detox in
your liver through phytochemicals called
glucosinolates your microbiome loves the
polyphenols in pomegranate and cranberry
right so
i think we have evolved co-evolved with
plants so we use these compounds these
phytochemicals to regulate all sorts of
biological functions from inflammation
to our microbiome to detoxification to
brain function neurotransmitters and so
on so on so i think
we there are plants you wouldn't want to
eat don't you don't eat poison mushrooms
right you don't eat foxglove which will
kill you you know any you know terrible
these terrible poisonous plants right
but
there are a lot of plants that we've
evolved with that we use in our bodies
to regulate our biological functions and
i think they're really necessary
how does the carnivore diet affect gut
health
but let's talk uh carnivore versus
vegetables so i
maybe i like vegetables a lot but i tend
to like the ones that are really um
carby
sweet potatoes are so delicious i would
give virtually everything to eat them
all day
but
i
even though i like vegetables partly out
of laziness because i don't want to cook
them
i am almost not entirely because i'll
throw in rice every now and then um but
i'm carnivore adjacent
i like that what is it
what nutrients do you fear i will miss
if i were to eat organ meat and all that
but not
have vegetables i think if you are
eating organ meat uh and doing it well
with a variety of nutrient-dense meats i
don't think you'd be meeting eat missing
many nutrients
other than fiber
which
is a major way that we help with gut
diversity
a robust variety of plant foods is
associated with a healthier microbiome
longer term and we have longer term
studies with these we don't have
longer-term studies with the carnivore
diet
i would assume that if someone's doing
it properly there they probably at a
period of time would be
would seem more good than bad
because they're removing a lot of foods
and then it's going to be a net positive
for them if they're doing a properly
formed carnivore diet right but
is that going to be sustainable long
term for them
most people are going to want more
variety than that
yeah i mean so the question is you know
is
are you going to make your microbiome
more resilient or not people should try
various diets and see what works for
them and i think a lot of people get
stuck in this regimented thing where and
it can backfire them too they're
carnivore so then when berries come in
season when people might watch this
towards the end of summer blueberries
gonna be in full swing does that mean
you totally avoid blueberries because
there's i believe i'm not one of these
people that think plants are bad i think
blueberries the anthocyanins and the
various and you know
antioxidants have a lot of benefit to
your microbiome into your body in
general
but then when you start to identify that
you're a carnivore or a keto or you're
vegan
then you close yourself down a little
bit
so i think in your case you don't have
any major health issues that i'm aware
of you know that you've talked about so
i would just continue what you're doing
but maybe in the winter probably the
best time to go carnivore i'm gonna say
[__] you and here's i don't ha i have
one health issue and that is i'm dying
so
the only real question i care about in
every health theory episode i do is how
do i live forever like if you're
steering by how you feel which is
essentially what i do
i just don't know what its impact is on
longevity um if a carnivore diet like if
somebody could tell me no no a thousand
percent if you do a carnivore diet
you're gonna live to 150. i'd be all
over the carnivore diet all day every
day i wouldn't even think about it i'd
never touch another [__] blueberry in
my life like i would just eat it um but
it's it's that big [__] question mark
about longevity that winds me up well
let me pose this question to you how
could a diet be negatively affecting
your longevity if it makes you feel
better that makes your sleep better if
it improves your heart rate variability
if it makes you stronger if it makes you
recover better how could it slow down
your longevity
i hope you guys enjoyed that episode and
give the carnivore diet a shot if you
think that it would work for you and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential